Name: Arturo Amaya
Lecture Name: Lecture 10
HeyGen API key: YTZhODM0NjM2ZGQwNGI4NmExMzg5ZTQwMGFmMjM3ZTAtMTcxNzc5MjAzNA==
Default Composition: [type:pip]
Default Transition: {type: fade, duration: 1.0}
Default Avatar: (id:Luke_public_3_20240306, voice_id:5dddee02307b4f49a17c123c120a60ca, position:0.75;0.75, scale:0.5, style:closeUp, cbc:#453423, bc:#FFEE22)
Slides:
    https://drive.google.com/file/d/1STNUYh7Dlf_MUz8-cochCJRcms91jh1o/view?usp=share_link
    https://drive.google.com/file/d/1ph-ge8GzqtAKVwhDvzH0qOZ85FM2oToY/view?usp=share_link    
    https://drive.google.com/file/d/1ph-ge8GzqtAKVwhDvzH0qOZ85FM2oToY/view?usp=share_link
--

Okay. So today's computer history is about the floppy disc. So in my computer career, let's see. When I started using computers when I was in elementary school or middle school, I guess elementary school I was using a time sharing system. I don't know what they stored things on. I assume it was giant diss and also magnetic tape. When I got my first personal computer when I was in middle school, I think, maybe it was high school. I didn't have a way to store programs away I stored programs or I didn't have a convenient way. The way I stored them was on cassette tape. Cassette tape was a little cartridge about this big predecessor to a CD. It was a magnetic tape it had two little reels in it and a little motor and the tape would go past had anybody seen a cassette tape? Okay, people have seen them. We used to store programs on them and they would just modulate two tones. I think it was 600 hertz and 300 hertz or it was three kill hertz and six kill hertz. Basically two tones. The record two tones. One tone would be a zero, the other tone would be a one. When you wanted to save your program, you set your cassette recorder to record and you played these tones through a wire that your computer was hooked to and it would beep high and low tones for ones and zeros. Then when you wanted to load your program back in, you turn your computer on and you would play the tape recorder into the computer and it would load bit by bit your program into memory, and it was pretty error prone. It was very difficult to find where you stored a program on a tape. Obviously, tape is sequential access. If you want to store multiplegrams on the tape, you'd put them in different posts on the tape, you'd have a little mechanical counter I told you how far into tap it was. It was very painful. Along came these floppy discs a little while later, which were basically magnetic media, but on a piece of mylar plastic. They came and I had one at home. I forgot to bring it. 

[type:avatar-only](position: 0.5;0.5, scale:1.0, style:circle) The typical one that first came out, they were 8 " then they had five and a quarter inches of five and a quarter inch from an apple two, and just a flexible disc. It was in a little sleeve of plastic sleeve and inside the sleeve was a circular piece of Molar. I would look like this. Have a little cutout here, which is a right protect tab. If you punch that hole, there was a optical center which prevented the disc from being written, so you could have read only floppies if you want. And then in this sleeve was kind of a slot like that and a hole here. This slot enabled the read head to go back and forth and read different parts of the disc. This hole enabled the motor to spin the disc around There was another hole in the disc here, and that was used by a light sensor, which would know when the hole passed the light sensor, so we know where track one began or sector one. The disc would rotate at certain speed. Let's say the light sensor was here, the disk drive would detect, the disc is now at sector one, certain time later. The thing you wanted to read, let's say in sector four was below the read head and would read it. Use that light sensor to figure out where on the disc because the disc is divided, if you know this. Even today, dis circular, at least the mechanical spinning kind, and they're divided into sectors. Then each of these sectors is divided into tracks. The read right head would move back and forth radially to seek a track called seeking. Then it would wait for the sector that I wanted to read to happen to be below it and then it would read and write. It's pretty amazing it actually worked considering how much mechanical stuff has to go on and even distrib today, the cheapest kind you can buy, the rotating media kind still work this way. It's just that they're sealed up. We went from this flexible one to a semi rigid one. This is probably about in the 1990s. These were three and a quarter inch floppy disc. 

[type:avatar-only](position: 0.5;0.5, scale:1.0, style:circle) They're just smaller and they had a hard case, so you couldn't bend them. And that's like the original Mcintosh used that. And then now floppy discs are just gone. You might find them in garage sales. But you're pretty hard pressed probably to find a floppy disc drive to read them. So that's. That's actually something you always have to worry about when you're archiving storage is the thing you're archiving to something that will exist in the future. There's lots of things like that examples of maybe your parents have old VHS tapes from a VCR, actually pretty hard to read because you still have to have a VHS player to read them, similar with fp. I can't use my laptop anymore because someone's piled apple juice on it. It's actually a true story. It was a citta C attack. Daughter was a sophomore in college. She was at the dining hall and she spilled apple juice on her Apple computer and got it all sticky and it wouldn't boot. She took it to the on campus not certified Apple store. I guess if you took it to Apple store, they basically said, Oh, you need a new computer, you have to replace the motherboard and it's going to cost $500 and new computer is $1,700 or something like that. But she took it to the bookstore and they said, Hey, did you spill something on this? And she said, Well, it was apple juice and it was all sticky on the inside. Anyway, they just cleaned it up and it worked fine for the next couple of years. It was a cider attack.

Okay. All right. We're talking about memory system. So we talked about pipelines, brands prediction, now we're going to start talking about memory systems a little bit out of order. I want to do memory systems first and then I'm going to come back and do instruction level parasm superscalar. I think it's important to understand how the memory system of computer works and how it affects the performance of the machine. Then we can start looking at some advanced pipeline stuff. Okay. So this is a classic graph. I actually haven't found it updated one, but things really haven't changed in the last ten years 15 years. This is a log graph. The speed here is performance. And performance we're going to measure in this case as latency. So when I talk about processor, I talk about latency, that means how long does it take to solve a problem. So my ability to solve a problem went from a factor of one, By 1990, I could do it ten times faster by 1995, I could do it 100 times faster, and I kept going up and up and up and it still goes up today. This is processor trends, if you looked at something like GPUs or massively parallel processors, you see that this graphic isn't a steeper slope. The amount of computation we have today because of the number transistors because of mores law, we can just keep stamping out more and more computation units and just do more and more computations of performance going up. Memory does not has not been improving the same way. Now, you might ask, well, doesn't Moore's law apply to memory as well does to processors? Does it? Does Moore's law apply to like memory technology? Yeah. You go back and more process, exactly. The answer is, yeah, more law applies to memory devices too. Memory devices, the ones we use today, most of our computers have made of DRM, which is built on semic process, same sem process, similar sems that we build logic on directly optimized for storage.

{wiperight} But the same kind of lithography applies, the same kind of processing equipment is used, the same kind of chemicals are used, so forth. Why is it that memory performance isn't improving latency isn't improving. Okay. Because overhead. What are some why is computation improving and memories not? Yeah. We one reason is the wires aren't getting faster. That's true both actually for computation chips and memory chips. Wires aren't getting any faster. Why is memory in particular, it's performance in terms of latency, not improving versus processor performance improving? Well, what makes the processor go. Go ahead. To queens. So there is amount of device physics involved. That's true in terms of as the devices get really small. It's harder, for example, to store charge, you know, like in a Dra. We've kind of overcome some of the things by doing some crazy things in a fab Yeah.'s gotten bigger. Memory has gotten bigger. Yeah, you're onto something. Memory has gotten bigger, so it's harder to access an individual cell. There's actually actually both things are happening and we're just benefiting in different ways. The reason we're getting this crazy performance increase is not because the transistors are going faster, it's because they're smaller, and so we can put more computation units on a die. If you look at a GPU from ten years ago, or let's say 15 years ago, to now, the number of multiple ad units, for example, has gone up exponentially. If I just look at the raw compute capacity of a new GPU, it's a lot faster, a lot more capacity capability than the previous one. Now, I could say the same thing about the memory. The memory, the amount of storage I have now has exponentially expanded compared to what I had ten years ago. I'm actually using Moore's lot in exactly the same way. It's just that I can take advantage of having more computational units to go faster computationally. I can take advantage of having more memory to have more memory. But it's not faster.